hey guys it's Richard watching the plain  bagel it's been a crazy week in the  world of Finance as you've probably  heard by now we've seen the collapse of  not one but two U.S banks over the span  of just a couple of days this past week  it started on Wednesday with silvergate  Capital Corp which is a crypto friendly  institution whose stock was already down  94 over the past six months announced  that it would begin its voluntary  liquidation to try and meet its  liabilities which caused the stock to  fall roughly another 50 since it's still  a publicly traded position and then on  Friday after seeing its own stock drop  60 percent on Wednesday alone and  another 66 plus percent in pre-market  trading on Thursday before the stock  trading was halted Silicon Valley Bank a  commercial bank that served primarily  startups and tech companies in  California was shut down by the FDIC the  Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation  and while the fall of silver bank is  itself problematic I can't emphasize  enough how much bigger of a story svb is  because of just how much bigger of a  bank it was at the end of 2022  silvergate had 6.3 billion dollars in  deposits compared to Silicon Valley Bank  which had over 170 billion or 27 times  what silvergate had in roughly 17 times  the amount of customer funds that were  misappropriated by FTX in fact svb is  the largest bank to collapse since the  2008 financial crisis and is the second  largest bank collapse in U.S history  so clearly a meaningful story and what's  really crazy here is that this isn't the  result of some bad loans or a stupid  investment in a cryptocurrency project  that went sour it all seems to be  because of a bank run where customers  withdraw more money than the bank has on  hand since it uses customer deposits to  lend out loans and can't immediately  recall that money something that many  consider to be an old problem and that  we haven't really seen to this scale  since again the 2008 financial crisis  now as with any story that involves a  collapse of a company bank or otherwise  I do want to provide a more well-rounded  perspective on the situation there's a  lot of people ringing the alarms and and  you know warning that this is the next  big financial crisis I think there's a  lot of nuance to the situation that's  worth highlighting things could evolve  very quickly and obviously this is a  developing story but you know it is very  very incredibly early to make such a  drastic call like that but there are  problems here that are worth addressing  and I want to focus primarily on svb  since it is a much larger bank and  Patrick Boyle recently put out a video  explaining the silvergate situation in  more detail than I'll likely go in with  this video so highly recommend that one  I'll leave a link in the description if  you want to learn more about that  situation but the two cover the same  problem the two stories are both kind of  about the same thing to an extent so you  kind of may as well explain the  silvergate situation to explain what  happened with svb so I'll be summarizing  that situation and then focusing on what  the ramifications of svb is for the  economy so silvergate as you might have  heard by now is an otherwise  conventional financial institution that  helped provide services for crypto  companies cryptocurrency exchanges and  services a lot of their clients were  cryptocurrency focused which was a  really good Niche for them prior to 2022  but with the collapse of FTX and all the  fraud that's surrounding the situation  with Sam bankman freed it's led to a run  on cryptocurrency exchanges which has  translated into a run on this financial  institution's assets and in the last  three months of 2022 alone silvergate  customers withdrew 8 billion dollars of  their crypto link deposits which  represented roughly two-thirds of the  cryptocurrency deposits and because this  Bank didn't have the full 8 billion  dollars on hand they had to sell 5.2  billion dollars worth of their assets to  meet this demand which translated into a  loss of 718 million dollars and to put  how much money they lost into  perspective if you took all the money  that the bank made in profits from 2016  up to the third quarter of 2022  it wouldn't even cover a quarter of the  money lost in Q4 of 2022 alone so yeah  they lost a lot of money as for why this  loss was so big as you might know Banks  hold a lot of their money in treasury  bonds including customer deposits which  is seen as a relatively safe and liquid  investment it doesn't earn you a crazy  return but you know there's confidence  in the US government and it's very easy  to sell to get your money back out of  these instruments but the problem is  that a lot of these Bonds were required  when interest rates were near Rock  Bottom over the past decade when the  federal funds rate was near zero and as  you might be aware fundamental  relationship in bonds is that their  price is inversely related to interest  rates so when interest rates were low  these Bonds were purchased up here and  now that rates have had their very  aggressive move higher  prices for these Bonds on the market  have decreased quite dramatically now  bonds are still typically a safer  investment because you could technically  just wait for them to mature to get the  face value of the bond back so you  wouldn't necessarily realize such a  drastic loss but the problem is that  this bank with these large customer  withdrawals had to meet these cash needs  immediately with the fire sale of these  bonds onto the Open Market at this  depressed price at basically the worst  time to do so in fact Bank even had to  take bonds I had planned to hold until  maturity that were classified as such on  their balance sheet and had to sell  those ones as well which even widened to  the loss further and all led to two  weeks ago the company announcing that it  wasn't sure if it would be a going  concern business and this past Wednesday  the company announcing a voluntary  liquidation of its assets that would be  closing down selling everything to try  and meet all of its liabilities now  that's not the end of the drama here the  company is still being investigated by  the Department of Justice for its  connections with FTX and Sam begman  freed who were allegedly big customer at  the bank with over one billion dollars  of assets with them and on the same day  as this announced liquidation we started  to see the crumbling of Silicon Valley  Bank which as mentioned is a much bigger  deal now Silicon Valley Bank is actually  just one of four businesses owned by the  holding company which is svb financial  the publicly traded stock albeit it is  the largest segment by far it makes up  roughly 90 of their pre-tax earnings as  of 2021 and as a name probably implies  they primarily service startups and  Technology firms which have been under  pressure in the current High rate  environment and economic Outlook because  in addition to all this Bond stuff  Rising rates do also make Capital harder  to access for Venture capitalists and  startups so it's not a very ideal  environment for someone who's trying to  start a business I know we've talked  numbers but again to put this bank's  size into perspective according to their  own filings they Bank nearly half of the  U.S venture-backed tech and Life  Sciences comp companies in the United  States so they are a big player in the  Venture Capital space and really at a  high level the situation is very similar  to what happened to silvergate it  started again on the Wednesday when SBB  announced that because of large customer  withdrawals it had lost 1.8 billion  dollars related to the fire sale of  assets to again meet those cash  withdrawals something that allegedly  stemmed from the company facing a  potential credit downgrade from Moody's  which also prompted the company to look  into selling 2.25 billion dollars in new  shares and preferred shares to bolster  its cash balance and restore confidence  in its operations but rather than  calming the markets this triggered a  panic in the Venture Capital space and  cause many Venture Capital companies to  advise their clients their startup  clients  to withdraw their money from the bank  and withdraw they did because in a  single day the company saw 42 billion  dollars worth of withdrawals roughly a  quarter of their customer deposits gone  in a single day at this point the  company had failed to raise Capital had  had it stock halted as it tried to find  a buyer for its business and on Friday  Regulators closed down the bank which  leaves us with the question of  what now you might have heard before  that Banks do not go bankrupt and that  is true and that applies in this  situation so where do we go from here  well according to silvergate's own  liquidation plan because again they are  still within control of their assets  unlike svb they plan to pay back  everyone's deposits and meet all their  obligations uh time will tell if that's  possible and if they have the means to  do so but being preemptive in doing this  liquidation does certainly help with  that as opposed to waiting for the last  second and as mentioned with svb they've  now been taken over by the FDIC as a  receiver meaning that they'll be selling  all the assets to try and meet  depositors and creditors liabilities  with the money being returned to  depositors as a dividend but they'll be  paid over time as the money is received  and there is also some protection here  for FDIC insured deposits with the FDIC  indicating that the positor should have  access to their insured funds no later  than Monday morning which is a awesome  turnaround but as great as that sounds  the problem is that 9 95.5 percent of  the bank's deposits  are not covered by this FDIC insurance  for a couple of reasons the first is  that some of these deposits are foreign  deposits which are not covered by FDIC  and the second reason is that the FDIC  only covers commercial accounts up to  250  000 and given that these are Silicon  Valley Ventures many of them have a lot  more than 250 000 to run their  corporation so that means that the vast  majority of deposits are not protected  by this traditional safety net  and that basically means the FDIC will  just have to do the best it can with the  assets that the bank has to raise the  money needed to cover these liabilities  which obviously does not give depositors  who are stuck with the spank a whole lot  of confidence but obviously the biggest  concern here it's more so about the  follow right the contagion effect here  and how this will impact other parts of  the US Financial system past week saw a  broad sell-off in the U.S financial  sector uh big Banks like JP Morgan and  Bank of America saw their stocks decline  quite a bit in other Regional Banks even  saw their trading activity halted we had  First Republic Bank Western Alliance  Bancorp pack West Bank Corp and perhaps  most notably Signature Bank which was  another bank that catered primarily to  cryptocurrency clients uh with 114  billion dollars in assets relative to  Silver Gates 11 billion dollars and with  how difficult it is to really quantify  the risk involved with the collapse of a  financial institution within the largest  economy in the world it has left a lot  of people wondering if this is the next  financial crisis in the United States  but again to that point I do want to  offer some points to consider not to  tell you that something's going to  happen this way or that way  but just to provide better perspective  for one an important thing to keep in  mind here well this is obviously going  to be detrimental to the cash flows of  venture firms uh and you know just their  financial situation as a whole  depositors are likely to get some of  their money back with some believing  that there is a chance depositors are  made whole  um same can't be said for investors  probably very low on the priority list  here but based again on what we can see  there are assets that should help cover  these deposits as of the end of 2022 the  company had 212 billion dollars in  assets of which roughly 131.4 billion  was in cash in government fixed income  securities which taken at face value  would represent 75.9 of deposits albeit  there is likely to see some write down  with the treasuries there and the  company is owed 73.6 billion dollars in  loans so that's money that the company  should eventually receive and that the  FDIC should be able to eventually pay  out two depositors and creditors and  assuming that the loans are as high  quality as the bank claimed before being  taken over that should help with the  situation another point to keep in mind  here is that again compared to  cryptocurrency collapses that we saw  this past year uh this situation has the  full attention of regulators and even  other financial institutions it's in  those parties best interests to maintain  faith in the U.S financial system so  they're obviously incentivized to see  this resolved in a sound way and finally  the biggest point to keep in mind is  that the scope of the situation is  currently pretty limited I understand  that there is a risk of contagion and  that's kind of the biggest fear people  have is that this will lead to other  types of Bank runs but this does seem to  be a relatively idiosyncratic situation  as has been highlighted by some other  analysts these are Regional commercial  Banks meaning that they operate in a  specific area they aren't a nationwide  operation and they cater to companies  not individual households or retail  Bankers it's unlikely that we'd see a  situation like this play out with one of  the bigger Banks like Bank of America or  JPMorgan JP Morgan has 2.3 trillion  dollars in deposits and has a much more  Diversified client base that again isn't  as exposed to the specific industry  risks that were faced by these other two  Banks given the collapse of crypto  currencies and the harsh environments  that venture capital is currently  operating within still with all this  there will likely be Fallout of some  sort we've already seen a sell-off in  the cryptocurrency space tied to  silvergate the usdc stablecoin has since  lost its Peg to the US dollar as it's  been revealed that it had exposure to  the Silicon Valley Bank and for anyone  in the space of  venture-backed tech companies this is a  devastating event right some people  might never recover from this I get that  with over a quarter million dollars of  money deposited these companies might  not be getting all that much Sympathy by  the end of the day these are firms that  contribute to the American economy that  have had their access to cash completely  hampered because of what's transpired  over just a couple of days and there  will likely be things that we can't  predict today that will happen down the  road because of what's happened this  past week but currently again  my point here is to provide a more  rounded perspective to kind of guide  people away from the headlines about the  next financial crisis because this is  nowhere near the scale of the 2008  financial crisis uh and is not nearly  the same fundamental issues at hand when  it comes to leverage and derivatives  this is tied to a bank run and  concentration risk primarily that also  caused issues because of rising interest  rates it's not nearly the same level of  say negligence You could argue that  concentration risk was poorly managed  and you know Building A Bank off of of  all tell cryptocurrency industry  silvergate is maybe less defensible but  nonetheless is a very fundamentally  different situation and this isn't the  fdic's first rodeo they actually just  dealt with the bank collapse in 2020  albeit a much much smaller situation  there but this is what they were made  for and the vast majority of retail  Bankers do have that FDIC insurance to  cover the vast majority of the deposits  they have if not all of them so long as  they do bank with an FDIC insured  institution still in terms of how far  reaching the impact here will eventually  be we will have to see how things play  out so that's the video another kind of  light on Frills piece to get it out  quickly and talk about something that  really has been very crazy and very fast  in the financial markets uh and trying  to counteract some of the titles that  you'll likely see around the situation  and  pull people back from the Hedge a little  bit so I hope you found the information  useful if you did please make sure to  like subscribe all that good stuff it  does help the channel tremendously and  let me know your thoughts on all this  down below thanks for joining me today  and as always  be safe out there